# Estimating the Cost for Rooftop Solar in Dekalb County

I was inspired by some 

The size of Chamblee High School is 125k sq ft. A 500W solar panel is estimated to be 27.5 sq ft. If we conservatively assume that we can only dedicate 25% of the roof to rooftop solar then we can fit a 1136 panel array. Since each panel is 500W this would have a capacity of 568kW. Georgia Solar is rated as getting an average of 4.74 sun hours per day year round. This gives us a total power generated of ~982MWh. That is enough to completely power 98 homes for the year. This system would cost $1.7m using an estimate of $3.00/W. However, utility scale solar is close to $1.00/W; By purchasing at scale and cheaper financing for the county $3.00 is certainly an upper estimate. DeKalb County collected $775m in tax revenue in 2022. So for 0.25% of our annual budget we could provide carbon-free energy to our homes and then reduce our energy costs for operating CHS. Or to put it another way there are $284k households in DeKalb County; if DeKalb County sold $100 bonds to pay for the cost of install we would only need 8% of households in the county to purchase a bond. 

At current energy prices of $0.14/kWh this would save $138k per year in energy savings, so this project would take 12.5 years to pay back. However the array would surely produce more energy than it consumes during the day. I can't get an estimate for the power usage of high schools but any extra power generated could be sold back to Georgia Power at the net metering rate of $0.06/kWh. This would reduce the payback time even further. 

Ideally we would also install batteries to sell any excess power back in the evening as the sun is setting when the grid needs it most. 